# Moin2Sphinx

Migration of a MoinMoin v1.x RST-based Wiki to Sphinx
=====================================================

This repository describes a method for migrating an existing Wiki site,
implemented as a [MoinMoin][1] Wiki engine version 1.9.x (which is based on Python2) 
to the [Sphinx][2] documentation generator.

It is assumed that the [MoinMoin][1] v1.9.x Wiki content is using [Restructured Text][3] (RST) files.
Please read the [reStructuredText Primer][12] about *Sections*, *Paragraphs* and other topics.

[1]: https://moinmo.in/
[2]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/
[3]: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/rst.html
[12]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html

Conversion of MoinMoin "wiki-markup" pages to RST
---------------------------------------------------------

The default markup in [MoinMoin][1] is the [wiki][13] markup, but other markups also exist.
For use with [Sphinx][2] such pages would need to be converted to [Restructured Text][3] (RST).

The [pandoc][14] universal markup converter might possibly be used (**not confirmed**), 
but this is rather uncertain.

Install [pandoc][14] on EL7 or EL8 systems by:
```
yum install pandoc
```

[13]: https://moin-20.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user/moinwiki.html
[14]: https://pandoc.org/

Add cross-page links to the MoinMoin pages
------------------------------------------

While the [sphinx-build][6] tool (used below) can parse most [MoinMoin][1] RST pages,
there are some cases where we have to insert extra information into some MoinMoin RST pages:

* Cross-page links to section headings in other pages need to have a *custom anchor* inserted above the section heading,
  for example:
```
.. _rst-overview:

RST Overview
============
```

In this way a reference to ```rst-overview``` can be made from any page using both [MoinMoin][1] as well as [Sphinx][2].
See [Use a custom anchor][10] for a description.
In a [Sphinx][2] [ref][11] command you then use the anchor text, for example:
```
This is a link to the RST Overview: :ref:`RST Overview`
```
NOTE: This is *only* required for sections that are linked to from other pages, and *not* for all sections!

[10]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html
[11]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#role-ref

Extract RST files from MoinMoin
-------------------------------

[MoinMoin][1] stores its Wikis in a top-level directory, and we assume here that the ```/var/moin``` directory is used.
The [writefiles.sh](writefiles.sh) script should be edited for the needs of your Wiki:

* First you must edit the script to omit these page patterns and add other pages/patterns that you do not want to convert:
```
OMIT_PATTERNS="HelpOnMacros WikiCourse AdminGroup BadContent "
```

* Also, some [MoinMoin][1] directories have separators such as (2d), (2e) of (2f), and these are rewritten in the script.
  Look for the ```mungedname=``` line and add any additional rewritings as needed for your Wiki.

Now execute the [writefiles.sh](writefiles.sh) script on the server where ```/var/moin``` is located:
```
Moin-server$ ./writefiles.sh <wikiname>
```
where the ```<wikiname>``` is one of the Wikis in ```/var/moin```.

The [writefiles.sh](writefiles.sh) script generates a tar-ball ```<wikiname>.tar.gz```
of the newest files from ```/var/moin/<wikiname>/data/pages/```.
It will ignore all older files (previous page revisions).
Since there does not seem to be any way to detect whether a file is in RST format or some other format,
we simply copy the files and append an ```.rst``` extension.

Setup a Python3 virtual environment
-----------------------------------

We will use a [Python3 virtual environment][4] to process RST files from [MoinMoin][1]:

```
yum install python3 
python3 -m venv venv
```

Activate it and install [Sphinx][2] :

```
. venv/bin/activate
pip3 install --upgrade pip
pip3 install sphinx
```

Check the [Sphinx][2] version by:
```
sphinx-build --version
```

Upgrade an existing installation of [Sphinx][2] :
```
pip3 install --upgrade sphinx
```

Alternatively, install Python3 RPM packages from the OS:
```
yum install python3 python3-pip
pip3 install sphinx
```

[4]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html

Customized Sphinx Makefile
--------------------------

The [Makefile.new_t](Makefile.new_t) template for the [Sphinx][2] ```Makefile``` adds some new rules
to the file generated by default:

* Web-server top-level directory ```WEBTOPDIR``` which you should customize for your site.

* A default rule of ```dirhtml``` for the HTML pages generation.

* A check for the Python virtual environment.

* An [rsync](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rsync) rule for copying HTML pages.

Convert the RST files into Sphinx format
----------------------------------------

Copy the tar-ball ```<wikiname>.tar.gz``` generated above to the current directory.

Define some predefined author names as an environment variable:
```
export AUTHOR="Fullname1[,Fullname2...]"
```

Run the script [moin2sphinx.sh](moin2sphinx.sh) on ```<wikiname>```:
```
./moin2sphinx.sh <wikiname>
```
This script will perform these steps:

* Unpacks the tar-ball files to a subfolder ```<wikiname>```

* Creates [Sphinx][2] files in a subfolder named ```<wikiname>```-sphinx.

* Calls the [sphinx-quickstart][5] tool that asks some questions about your project
  and then generates a complete documentation directory and sample ```Makefile``` to be used with [sphinx-build][6].
  We are going to set the [Sphinx][2] *Project name* to ```<wikiname>``` (with first letter capitalized), and the version to 1.0.

* Runs the script [moin2sphinx.py](moin2sphinx.py) to convert the [MoinMoin][1] RST files
  in subfolder ```<wikiname>``` to [Sphinx][2] format into the folder ```<wikiname>```-sphinx.

[5]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/man/sphinx-quickstart.html
[6]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/man/sphinx-build.html

Edit the table of contents
--------------------------

Go to the ```<wikiname>```-sphinx folder and edit the file ```index.rst```:

* Delete any page names which you do not want in the [Sphinx][2] documentation.

* Reorder page names in a logical way for the project. 

Change Sphinx page theme (optional)
-----------------------------------

[Sphinx][2] provides a number of builders for HTML and HTML-based formats,
see [Sphinx themes][7].

The [sphinx-quickstart][5] tool may work with a number of **templates**,
see the manual section on *Project templating options for sphinx-quickstart*.

The [Sphinx themes][7] may be defined in the template file ```conf.py_t```.
You can copy a ```conf.py``` (created as above) to the top-level directory and use it for all future Wiki pages:
```
cp <wikiname>-sphinx/conf.py conf.py_t
```
and edit this file to select a different theme (the default is *alabaster*), for example:
```
html_theme = 'classic'
```
There are also externally provided themes such as the [sphinx-rtd-theme][9] which you can install with:
```
pip3 install sphinx-rtd-theme
```
and configure it in ```conf.py``` or ```conf.py_t``` with
(notice that the _ replaces -):
```
extensions = [ 'sphinx_rtd_theme', ]
html_theme = 'sphinx_rtd_theme'
```
See also the [Sphinx Configuration](https://sphinx-rtd-theme.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configuring.html) page.

[9]: https://github.com/readthedocs/sphinx_rtd_theme

When you run the [moin2sphinx.sh](moin2sphinx.sh) script, it will use the
current directory ```.``` for [sphinx-quickstart][5] templates like:
```
sphinx-quickstart --templatedir . <further options...>
```
and pick up the ```conf.py_t``` template file and use it
when creating a new ```<wikiname>-sphinx/conf.py```.

[7]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/theming.html

Generate HTML pages
-------------------

Go to the ```<wikiname>```-sphinx folder and and generate HTML pages using [sphinx-build][6]:
```
make dirhtml
```
The ```make dirhtml``` command makes [sphinx-build][6] build HTML pages with a single directory per document in ```_build/dirhtml/```.
This makes for prettier URLs (no .html) if served from a webserver.
Also, this will make the web-page URLs have the same names as with [MoinMoin][1]
(otherwise you will have to use .html URLs).

The HTML pages will be built in the ```_build/html/``` and ```_build/dirhtml/``` subfolders with an index.html file
which you can use in a browser, for example:

```
firefox file://<path-to-project>/<wikiname>-sphinx/_build/dirhtml/index.html
```
or copy the files to a web-server using this customized ```Makefile``` rule from the above [Makefile.new_t](Makefile.new_t):
```
make rsync
```

To start over the HTML page generation from scratch in the ```<wikiname>```-sphinx folder:
```
rm -rf _build
make dirhtml
```
You can also delete the ```<wikiname>```-sphinx folder and repeat the [moin2sphinx.sh](moin2sphinx.sh) script starting as above.

Correcting Sphinx errors with MoinMoin RST files
================================================

There may be several errors and warnings from [Sphinx][2] while HTML pages are generated:

* ```ERROR: Unknown target name:```   
  See [Add cross-page links to the MoinMoin pages](#add-cross-page-links-to-the-moinmoin-pages) above
  and [Use a custom anchor][10] for a description.

* ```ERROR: Anonymous hyperlink mismatch:```   
  See the section [Downloadable attachment files](#downloadable-attachment-files) below.

These types of errors are simplest to correct by manually editing the [Sphinx][2] RST file.

Downloadable attachment files
-----------------------------

In [MoinMoin][1] attachment files can be added to a Wiki page, 
You refer to the attachment like this:
```
The latest version of FooBar is available as FooBar__
__ attachment:FooBar
```
This seems to be a special feature of [MoinMoin][1].

[Sphinx][2] has a different method (role) to [reference downloadable files][8].
The way to include downloadable attachment files is:
```
The latest version of FooBar is available as :download:`FooBar <FooBar>`
```
where the file referenced must be found in the current directory.

[8]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#referencing-downloadable-files
